Docker – Containerization Documentation
Overview

Docker is used to containerize the Python application to ensure consistent behavior across different environments.
By using Docker, the application can run the same way on any machine without dependency or environment issues.

Project File Structure
.
├── Dockerfile
├── app.py
└── requirements.txt

Dockerfile Explanation
Base Image
FROM python:3.10-slim


Uses python:3.10-slim as the base image.

The slim version is lightweight and smaller in size compared to the full Python image.

Working Directory
WORKDIR /app


Sets /app as the working directory inside the container.

Dependencies Installation
COPY requirements.txt .
RUN pip install --no-cache-dir -r requirements.txt


Copies requirements.txt first to take advantage of Docker layer caching.

Uses --no-cache-dir to reduce the final image size.

Application Files
COPY . .


Copies all application files into the container.

Port & Startup Command
EXPOSE 5000
CMD ["python", "app.py"]


Exposes port 5000 for the application.

Runs the application using Python.

How to Build and Run the Application
1. Build the Docker Image
docker build -t my-python-app:latest .

2. Run the Docker Container
docker run -d -p 5000:5000 --name my-app my-python-app:latest


Runs the container in detached mode.

Maps port 5000 from the container to the host.

3. Verify the Container is Running
docker ps

4. Test the Application
curl http://localhost:5000

5. View Container Logs
docker logs my-app

6. Stop and Remove the Container
docker stop my-app
docker rm my-app

Docker Commands Summary
Command	Description
docker build	Build an image from a Dockerfile
docker run	Run a container from an image
docker ps	List running containers
docker logs	View container logs
docker stop	Stop a running container
docker rm	Remove a container
Best Practices Applied

✅ Use of a slim base image to reduce image size
✅ Copying requirements.txt first to leverage Docker layer caching
✅ Using --no-cache-dir to minimize image size
✅ Explicitly exposing the application port

Notes

Ensure that requirements.txt exists in the project directory.

The application runs on port 5000 by default.

The exposed port can be changed using the -p option in the docker run command.
